---
layout: page
title: About the MC HCK
author: Simon Schubert
sidebar: false
---

#+ATTR_HTML: :alt MC HCK R1 being programmed
[[/images/mchck-r1-programming-small.jpg]]

The MC HCK (pronounced: "McHack" [m\aelig{}k h\aelig{}k]) is a /small/, /cheap/, and
/versatile/ microcontroller platform that supports USB for easy
programming, and can be built at home for $5.  The MC HCK enables
everybody to build big and small projects, because spending >$20 for
other microcontroller boards is just too much.

With the MC HCK, everybody can quickly build projects on a small
budget: In many situations, a set of optional footprints avoid the
need for expensive add-on boards!  These optional features are not
populated by default to keep the price low; however, the user can
easily solder on components to enable these features.  There is space
for a LiPo charger, SPI flash storage (up to 8MB), voltage regulators
(up to 16V), a mounting screw, a 2.4GHz radio module, and more!

The MC HCK is /entirely open source/, both hardware and software.
Check out our [[https://github.com/mchck/mchck/wiki/Schematic-and-layout][project repository]] to get the latest KiCad designs or
[[https://github.com/mchck/mchck/tree/fab/hardware][fabrication outputs]].  /Everybody is encouraged to build MC HCKs!/

** The name

Like the board itself, the name is versatile and can be used in
different ways.  "MC" is short for microcontroller, but it also makes
it sound like a Scottish surname, and Scots are stereotypically cheap.
We like cheap.  And "HCK" stands for "hacking", "hackers",
"hackspaces", but shorter, smaller.  Like the MC HCK board itself.
And MC/HCK is a pun on TCP's SYN/ACK, meaning "ready to go", even a
step ahead.

Oh and it rhymes.

** Motivation

*Small.* The Arduino is huge.  It is just way bulky for many purposes.
Also you can't breadboard with it.  Ok, now there is the Pro Mini or
the Teensy.  Yes, that's the form factor we want.  *Small form factor
enables more uses.*

*Cheap.* Well, there you have it.  Every Arduino sets you back about
$20.  The mbed costs way more.  Ok, the MSP430 Launchpad costs $8, but
then it is... well, the Launchpad.  But $5 sounds good.  At $5, you
don't have to ponder anymore whether your silly idea is _really_ worth
it.  $20 might be too much to measure when the postman delivers
letters (plot it over the year?).  Or instead, you decide to take
apart your Arduino rig that was used to count how often you open the
fridge door, and use it for the mailbox instead; you all know the
drill -- $20 makes you stingy ("frugal").  $5 always goes.  *Low
price fosters creativity.*

*Versatile.* We try to squeeze as many features as possible into the
little space of the MC HCK.  A modern ARM MCU with integrated USB
transceiver allows easy interfacing with PCs: with a bit of supplied
library code, implementing a USB device is a breeze.  The MC HCK can
be programmed directly via USB, but can also serve as debug adapter
for another MC HCK board.  We also integrated a mounting hole and
footprints for a LiPo charger, a NOR Flash, for 3 different voltage
regulators, and for a 2.4GHz RF module.  Because, you know, you never
know.  *Versatile means less shields, more features.*

** Philosophy

The MC HCK is a quick hack toy from geeks, for geeks.  It is designed
to be versatile, without adding excess cost: the board provides some
more features for those of us who are not afraid of soldering the odd
component on a board.  We've included a footprint for a LiPo charger
IC, so that you can easily convert it to an autonomous unit, and if
you populate the footprint for the SPI flash IC, you can store up to
8MB of data for true autonomous sensor applications.  Add a $2 2.4GHz
RF module, and you have the first node of a sensor network.  No
expensive "shields" necessary.

The MC HCK is not a product designed to make money.  We want a small,
cheap and powerful microcontroller platform to be available everybody
for easy hacking and building.  To get to our target of $5, we need to
produce at least 10k units.  But somebody's got to bite the bullet and
go through with it and build and sell it.  If it has to be one of us,
so be it, if somebody else will do it instead of us, even better.

The MC HCK is a community project and needs you!  We'd love to hear
feedback from you, especially (constructive) criticism.  What did we
do wrong, what do you think could be done better?  Let us know what
you think!  What are your expectations towards such a board; what
would you like to see as a feature?  Do you think we have an error in
our [[https://github.com/mchck/mchck/wiki/Schematic-and-layout][design]]?  Get involved and post [[https://github.com/mchck/mchck/issues][bug reports]] and edit the wiki!
